GEP-3793: Default Gateways (#3852)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-3793/index.md

> # GEP-3793: Default Gateways

Reviewer: This is likely an awful idea, but I'll throw it out there as something that may at least merit some thoughts in "alternatives considered" in the next phase of the GEP. Instead of "Default Gateways", we could allow individual Gateway (Listeners) to be configured with "greedy" behavior. That might mean that they would claim all Routes that didn't have a parentRef specified, or it might mean that Routes could specify (and maybe did by default) that they should be picked up by any greedy Listeners. Just one example of a solution here not strictly requiring individual Gateways to be labeled as "default".

Reviewer 2: This suggestion is appealing as it makes the initial configuration easy for the cluster operator and for the application developer, and it works well for small clusters.  However, something I've seen happen time and again is that a cluster starts with a single default ingress-controller with a single proxy deployment and load balancer which gradually takes on additional workload as the cluster grows until it reaches a breaking point at which the proxy deployment has become overburdened.  At that point, it can be difficult to shift workload after the fact to different proxies or load-balancers.  I am wary of designing the feature in such a way as to guide people towards brick walls.

Reviewer 3: @kflynn I recommend adding this as a note in the GEP, perhaps in "alternatives considered" as suggested, and then we can consider this resolved for this first pass.

* Issue: [#3793](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3793)

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer 4: I do agree that this is a bit early to be talking about implementation, but I feel like I also need to lay out my thoughts on these initial ideas.

I agree about the mutating webhook and magic strings, but disagree about adding a default - as long as we add a default to a field that's not already requried, it's not a breaking change and is backwards compatible. I'd disagree on it being confusing and easy to break as well.

I also don't favor only having the implementation option of "wait for a year or two for a currently-alpha feature to maybe graduate" - we _cannot_ use MutatingAdmissionPolicy as a main or required method until it's GA in _all supported Kubernetes versions_. Which, given that it's still alpha, is at least a year, probably two away, thanks to our "5 most recent Kubernetes versions" support policy.

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer 5: I am wondering if maybe we have  a different view of what the (very vague) "use a MAP" entails? I was thinking it's just a doc/sample that says "if you want to apply custom defaults to fields,here's an example MAP" (which could actually default more than just Gateway name!). We already have docs like "If you want to use multicluster use this [alpha] MCS API". I'm not suggesting you do `kubectl apply gateway-api.yaml` and get a MAP -- that would definitely be a no-go until it's GA at N-5.

Also an alternative option is we just do nothing and do not accept this GEP. We should always keep that option as a viable path forward.

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer 4: Yeah, thanks, that's worth clarifying.

I think that having _guidance_ saying "hey, if you really care about this, maybe this alpha feature may help, and here's a sample" is pretty useful.

But it seems clear that folks would like something more concrete than a suggestion for this very soon. I've definitely heard many complaints from users of this API that there's no way to do something like including an Ingress in a Helm chart to easily expose the app, which is a thing we've lost - and I think this feels like the biggest thing that people don't like about Gateway API.

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer 4: As I said in another comment, it seems likely that the thing that's being targeted here is "what happens if a HTTPRoute has no parentRefs?". The current answer is "nothing", but a relatively large amount of feedback we've got from users and community members is that this makes many use cases (common ones, like including a HTTPRoute in a Helm chart), not work without further user or admin intervention.

People really liked the magic behaviors of Ingress, and this is about trying to figure out if there's a way we can get closer to that.

To be clear, implicit behaviors like "if the parentRefs are empty, do this" make me _very_ uncomfortable. Magic action at a distance is where Ingress had most of its problems, and is one of the primary reasons for the existence of Gateway API in the first place. I'm also not convinced yet that changing the API is necessary, but the only way to resolve this in a way that handles everyone's opinions fairly is this process we're doing right now.

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer 5: > common ones, like including a HTTPRoute in a Helm chart)

> * Status: Provisional

Reviewer: >I know this goes against our GEP process, but IMO the implementation plan is critical to decide on this gep. We shouldn't decide "we will do X feature" and then realize all options are not worth the cost vs benefit.

+1. Agreeing that we should _try_ to do this, does not mean that we should. It's entirely possible that as the design details get clearer here, we decide that it's not worth the cost. Although that's possible with all potential GEPs, this one seems like it's at a higher risk because it's more ambiguous and the solutions are a bit less obvious than others. With that said, I really would like to find a way to provide as simple a UX as possible for this.

> * Status: Provisional

Author: A link to this thread is certainly relevant, and the commentary on implementation concerns is definitely... uh... earlier than I'd expected. 🙂 

The things I agree with most strongly here are both comments from @youngnick:

> ...the only way to resolve this in a way that handles everyone's opinions fairly is this process we're doing right now.

Absolutely! So thanks, everyone, for chiming in. 

> ...we cannot use MutatingAdmissionPolicy as a main or required method until it's GA in all supported Kubernetes versions. Which, given that it's still alpha, is at least a year, probably two away..

Even leaving aside my preference to _not_ mutate `spec`, this makes a MAP _requirement_ a dealbreaker. As @howardjohn notes, though, there are ways we could discuss using it if we eventually decide that mutating `spec` is the way to go. (Yes, I have twice said I don't like mutations. No, that does not mean that I'm refusing to consider it as we discuss implementations. I'm sure my biases will continue to be well-represented in the GEP, though. 😇)

> * Status: Provisional

Author: Linked in the doc, with additional clarifications.

(See [status definitions](../overview.md#gep-states).)

## User Story

**[Ana] wants a concept of a default Gateway.**

Gateway API currently requires every north/south Route object to explicitly
specify its parent Gateway. This is helpful in that it removes ambiguity, but
it's less helpful in that [Ana] is stuck constantly explicitly configuring a
thing that she probably doesn't care much about: in a great many cases, Ana

> just wants to create a Route that "works from the outside world" and she

Author: I'll see what I can find, but to be clear, I definitely do not think that a default will serve _every_ Ana's routes. I just think that we can provide defaulting functionality in a way that helps _enough_ Anas to be worth it.

> just wants to create a Route that "works from the outside world" and she

Author: Added to non-goals, though I should note that I didn't find stuff to refer back to.

really doesn't care what the Gateway is called.

Therefore, Ana would like a way to be able to rely on a default Gateway that
she doesn't have to explicitly name, and can simply trust to exist.

[Ana]: https://https//gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#ana

## Goals

- Give Ana a way to use Gateway API without having to explicitly specify a

>   Gateway for every Route, and without mutating Routes.

Reviewer 4: To me it reads like Flynn is saying here "we shouldn't need to change the Route as it's entered to do this".

(I tend to disagree, because I think one of the best properties of Gateway API is that there's no _implicit behavior_, everything is explicitly configured. But that's what we're here to talk about).

>   Gateway for every Route, and without mutating Routes.

Reviewer 4: One thing that seems to be implied by a lot of these rules, but might be worth being explicit about, is that whatever we pick here will _only_ apply to HTTPRoutes with _empty_ `parentRefs`.

If you specify _one_ parentRef, you have to specify _all of them_.

That also allows this to cover "but what about GAMMA routes? Do they get a default Gateway?" - using the above rule means that no, in order to use GAMMA, you need to specify a GAMMA parentRef, which means that if you want that HTTPRoute also exposed via a Gateway, you need to explicitly configure that.

>   Gateway for every Route, and without mutating Routes.

Reviewer 3: I tend to agree, and I think we should soften the language:

```suggestion
  Gateway for every Route (if feasible, without mutating Routes).
```

>   Gateway for every Route, and without mutating Routes.

Author: @youngnick did indeed correctly summarize what I meant about mutations, and I'm about 99% in agreement as well that once you start specifying any parentRef you have to specify all of them. I'll clarify that.

>   Gateway for every Route, and without mutating Routes.

Author: Updated the API section with more discussion about CD, mutation, etc.

- Give Ana an easy way to determine which Gateway is the default, and which of
  her Routes are bound to it.

> - Support multiple Gateways in a cluster, with exactly one of them being the
>   default Gateway.

Reviewer 3: I agree, this is a very important point. I have a very strong preference that we be able to do this per namespace. Though I can conceive of people wanting this to be configurable. I would be comfortable with the following language:

```suggestion
- Decide on a "domain" scope for Gateways (e.g. cluster or namespace)
  - Optional: consider whether we would make the domain scope configurable, perhaps at the GatewayClass level.
- Support multiple Gateways in a cluster where there can be a default per a domain.
```

>   default Gateway.

Reviewer 4: As I said in another thread here, choosing a default Gateway is also effectively choosing a default GatewayClass. So there's that dimension to consider as well - how do we choose a default GatewayClass? Is that implicit in the choice of a default Gateway? Or should that be an explicit choice at the GatewayClass level? (I'm inclined towards the latter, because explicit).

So only being able to choose "cluster" or "namespace" scope for default Gateways is kind of insufficient, because we need to ensure the full tree is built - so that, if there are multiple GatewayClasses in a cluster, then only one of the  implementations can end up processing the default Gateway.

- Allow [Chihiro] to retain control over which Gateway is the default, so that
  they can ensure that it meets their requirements for security, performance,
  and other operational concerns.

- Allow Chihiro to rename, reconfigure, or replace the default Gateway without

>   breaking existing Routes.

Reviewer 4: That's generally not how we expect implementations to behave - if a large config change is made, and that breaks things, then things should break, because the broken state is reflective of the current configured state.

The risk if we _don't_ keep that principle running is that it makes the Kubernetes API no longer the single source of truth, meaning that state needs to be tracked inside the implementation, which also implies that if the implementation restarts, then the fresh state will be broken. The net effect there is that, if you don't break things when you see the config change, then things will break when you next restart something.

This is a downside of a reconciliation loop design - it's not safe to not reconcile broken changes, even if you _know_ they'll break things. You have to do the things the user has asked, even if that will break things.

> - Allow Chihiro to rename, reconfigure, or replace the default Gateway without
>   breaking existing Routes.

Reviewer 3: I recommend we add:

```suggestion
- Allow Chihiro to rename, reconfigure, or replace the default Gateway

- Provide mechanisms for safely handling feature breakage when replacing the default Gateway.
```

>   breaking existing Routes.

Author: Updated goals.

- Allow Chihiro to control which Routes may bind to the default Gateway, and

>   to enumerate them.

Reviewer 6: Allowing Chihiro to control which Routes may bind seems to defeat the purpose of making it easier for Ana.

Author: +1 especially for `gwctl` helping here.

It's really not practical to remove Chihiro's existing control over which Routes can bind to a Gateway: that's a massive change that's hard to explain and reason about, and there are too many situations where I can easily imagine wanting to _not_ allow the whole cluster to bind Routes to an externally-visible Gateway.

Author: Resolving this one without changes specifically for it – I _think_ it's clear enough at this point.

- Support easy interoperation with common CI/CD and GitOps workflows.

> 

Reviewer 6: One more - exclude default Gateways from listener or gateway merging?

Reviewer 4: I think all of these are definitely good things to think about.

## Non-Goals

- Support multiple "default" Gateways in a single cluster. If Ana has to make
  a choice about which Gateway she wants to use, she'll need to be explicit

>   about that.

Reviewer 6: We could permit multiple gateways that are still easy to identify by allowing one default gateway per namespace.  Ana should be able to identify the namespace to use.

Reviewer 4: I think the thing that's the most important to remember here is that choosing a default Gateway is also choosing a default GatewayClass and implementation, so we'll need to be deliberate about how we do that to ensure that multiple-Gateway-implemetation clusters work well too.

Author: I'm not completely opposed to the idea of a default per namespace, but the more I think about, the more potential I think there is for confusion: while a great many people run namespace-per-tenant, others e.g. use namespaces as logical divisions within a single application, or a namespace per dev team, or whatever. So it's kind of less clear to me that default-per-namespace should be an initial goal.

- Allow Ana to override Chihiro's choice for the default Gateway for a given
  Route without explicitly specifying the Gateway.

## Overview

Gateway API currently requires every north/south Route object to explicitly
specify its parent Gateway. This is a wonderful example of a fundamental

> tension in Gateway API:

Reviewer 6: I really don't think of this as a fundamental tension.  It's more about Ana learning how to use Gateway API to her advantage, or Chihiro naming/sharing information properly.

- [Chihiro] and [Ian] value _explicit definition_ of everything, because it
  makes it easier for them to reason about the system and ensure that it meets
  the standards they set for it.

- [Ana], on the other hand, values _simplicity_ and _ease of use_, because
  she just wants to get her job done without having to think about every little
  detail.

At present, Gateway API is heavily weighted towards the point of view of
Chihiro and Ian. This causes friction for Ana: for example, she can't write
examples or documentation for her colleagues (or her counterparts at other
companies) without telling them that they'll need to be sure to edit the
Gateway name in every Route. Nor can she write a Helm chart that includes a
Route without requiring the person using the chart to know the specific name
for the Gateway to use.

The root cause of this friction is a difference in perspective: to Chihiro and
Ian, the Gateway is a first-class thing that they think about regularly, while
to Ana, it's an implementation detail that she doesn't care about. Neither
point of view is wrong, but they are in tension with each other.

> ### Prior Art

Reviewer 4: I think probably the most critical prior art example to talk about here is Ingress and IngressClass - there are multiple ways to choose a default IngressClass, which, while similar in some ways to GatewayClass (it was the design inspiration), had a very similar effect in that it meant that you didn't need to explicitly specify an Ingress class via reference or annotation if you didn't want to.

It also had the downside that accidental stomping on config became much, much easier, because the Ingress specification never defined what happened with Ingress objects that specified the same routing - most implementations ended up replicating the ingress-nginx behavior of _merging_ conflicting config, which definitely led to unexpected outcomes. Those exact problems were one of the primary original drivers for Gateway API as a whole.

Reviewer 4: I think we're in a better spot in Gateway API because we _do_ specify conflict resolution behaviors, though.

Author: OK _fine_ we can toss the phones for this. 😉

code when using a phone in North America: it's more digits, but it's less
operationally complex, and it removes actual problematic ambiguity.

It's rare to find systems that are purely one or the other: in general, the
trick is to find a usable balance between explicitness and simplicity, while
managing ambiguity.

[Chihiro]: https://https//gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#chihiro
[Ian]: https://https//gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/concepts/roles-and-personas/#ian

### The Problems

## API

Most of the API work for this GEP is TBD at this point. The challenge is to
find a way to allow Ana to use Routes without requiring her to specify the
Gateway explicitly, while still allowing Chihiro and Ian to retain control
over the Gateway and its configuration.

An additional concern is CD tools and GitOps workflows: any solution that
mutates the `spec` of a Kubernetes resource tends to cause problems for these
tools. While it's possible to tell tools like Argo CD and Flux to ignore
certain elements of the `spec` that are known to mutate, the `parentRef` is
definitely _not_ a field where changes should be ignored! This strongly

> implies that the ideal API will not mutate the `spec` of the Route.

Reviewer 5: not an expert here. Don't these tools only break for changes made after object creation though? If it's mutated during admission they are fine (else all defaulting in CRD in general would break?)

Reviewer 5: A MAP mutation is no different from the 100s of `default` fields we have in CRDs IMO. Its a hidden implementation detail which component is assigning defaults

Author: Well, no, it's different in that MAP is an implementation detail that isn't available to us for quite awhile. 🙂

More importantly, the implementation isn't what I was talking about above. As I said, it doesn't matter what's doing the mutating, it matters that the tool is comparing what's checked into Git with what it reads from the cluster. If fields get changed on creation, the GitOps tool does see that.

### Gateway for Ingress (North/South)

### Gateway For Mesh (East/West)

## Conformance Details

#### Feature Names

The default-gateway feature will be named `HTTPRouteDefaultGateway` and

> `GRPCRouteDefaultGateway`. It is unlikely that an implementation would support

Reviewer 6: I suspect that including separate features for separate route types will be a detail that Ana doesn't want to deal with.

There has been (much!) [discussion] about whether the ideal API for this
feature will mutate the `parentRefs` of a Route using a default Gateway to
reflect the Gateway chosen, or whether it should not, relying instead on the
`status` stanza to carry this information. This is obviously a key point that
will need resolution before this GEP can graduate.

[discussion]: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3852#discussion_r2140117567

### Gateway for Ingress (North/South)

### Gateway For Mesh (East/West)

## Conformance Details

#### Feature Names

The default-gateway feature will be named `HTTPRouteDefaultGateway` and
`GRPCRouteDefaultGateway`. It is unlikely that an implementation would support
one of these Route types without the other, but `GatewayDefaultGateway` does
not seem like a good choice.

### Conformance tests

## Alternatives

A possible alternative API design is to modify the behavior of Listeners or
ListenerSets; rather than having a "default Gateway", perhaps we would have
"[default Listeners]". One challenge here is that the Route `status` doesn't
currently expose information about which Listener is being used, though it

> does show which Gateway is being used.

Reviewer 7: I think this might actually be possible to express in [RouteParentStatus](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#routeparentstatus) already, which includes the full [ParentReference](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/reference/spec/#parentreference) with `sectionName` and `port` - I'm unsure if conformance requires this level of specificity though.

This lack of clarity around route attachment to listener(s) might actually exist even for routes with explicit `parentRef` targeting omitting the optional `sectionName` field?
